So with these widget and app lifecycles out of the way, let's turn towards something which we've seen
a lot but which I haven't really had a closer look at. In your build methods,
you always get this build context argument,
now what's this build context all about in the end?
We also use it for example in conjunction with media query or with theming with this of context method.
What's the idea behind context? In Flutter, every widget has its own context,
so every widget has its own context attached to it and that's the context to get in the build method.
That's why also if you have certain builder methods, like for showModalBottomSheet, the function you
pass there, like this one here, actually receives a context.
So this function, we're not using it here but this function also receives a context automatically
passed in by Flutter because builder functions like this also return a new widget in the end and
that widget has its own context.
So context is everywhere and every widget has its own context attached.
Now the context in the end is the element of a widget in the element tree you could say. It's some meta
information about the widget and its location in the widget tree.
So context is used internally by Flutter to understand where this widget belongs and all the contexts
of all the widgets
as I said are basically the elements in the element trees and therefore these contexts you could say
know about each other, they know how widgets are related, how they belong together. The contexts build a
skeleton of your widget tree, that's how you could think about that.
So that context gives you a direct communication channel across your entire widget tree because all
contexts in the end know about each other, they know where in the widget tree they are and which other widgets
exist around them
so to say and that's why for example for accessing the theme or for navigation or for media queries,
you use the context because Flutter has a very efficient communication channel behind the scenes for
passing data between widgets.
We right now always pass data between widgets by using their constructor, right, for example here when
I create a chart, I pass a list of my recent transactions as an argument to the chart constructor and
therefore in the chart widget, we have to define the constructor,
accept this argument, store this argument in a property and then use this property here inside of the chart
widget,
that is how we pass data between widgets.
Now it's important to know this is the default way of passing data but if you have a large widget tree,
so with a widget that has another widget as a child which has yet another widget as a child and so on, then
passing data between these widgets can get cumbersome.
Here's an example and we'll learn about a feature called InheritedWidget that helps us with making that
simpler.
So here's our setup,
we have a relatively large widget tree with our app widget, products widget, single product and product
detail widget and also a card widget which is a sibling to the product widget,
for example in a row or in a column.
Now if we need some information that's managed in the state of my app in our product detail widget, then
we in the end have to parse that data down through all the widgets all the way down to the product detail
widget and
that's what we're currently doing in the app.
Now depending on the size of the app and the layers of widgets you have, this may or may not be a problem.
For general data, like what's our core theme which is set up right at the start of our app or what are
the device dimensions, what's the device orientation which also is managed by Flutter
basically when we create the app, so therefore on the level of our root widget in the app, if we have
such data that is possibly used by any widget in the tree and therefore would have to be passed down through
many layers of widgets,
then using arguments and manually passing down theme data and media query data would be really cumbersome,
hence Flutter gives us a special widget, the InheritedWidget. We never used that but media query and
theme uses that behind the scenes and you get a direct tunnel to the InheritedWidget and to data
managed in there with the help of context because the context know about the general structure of your
widget tree and therefore, they can directly access any other widget without passing data through arguments.
That's what's happening here in the main.dart file for example when we use media query of context. In
the end we tell Flutter we want to get access to our media query data, that MediaQueryData happens to
be used at the top of our app in the end when we create the material app
you could say, the same for the theme for example and instead of manually passing down our theme data
object here with the constructor of MyHomePage app and so on and then to any other child widget as well
and the same for MediaQueryData which is totally managed behind the scenes, instead of passing that
through constructors, the context object has all the information Flutter needs to find out where our widget
is positioned in the widget tree and how it gets to the topmost widget and then it uses this inherited
widget feature which we won't dive too deep into right now to get that general theme or media query
data.
So context holds information about the position of the widget in the overall widget tree and it is really
useful to Flutter because it allows Flutter to establish a direct communication channel behind the scenes,
to exchange data between maybe at the top of our widget tree or in a certain widget,
in general in our widget tree, in a totally different widget in our widget tree which might be a
couple of layers of widgets down. We'll actually also take advantage of this idea of passing data behind
the scenes in the state management section of this course, where I will show you a convenient alternative
to passing data via constructors of widgets. For the moment, we'll stick to that, we pass data through constructor
approach but later, as I said, I will show you an alternative which is really good for bigger apps with
multiple pages which we don't really have yet.
Hence for now, our approach is fine but it's important to understand what the general role of context
is.